---
author: dhc
comments: false
layout: post
published: true
snippet: 150
categories:
- think.stack
title: Chapter 3
---

# Introduction

This chapter studies the creation of an Aztec pantheon in sixteenth-century sources in sixteenth-century sources. In the previous chapter, we've studied the process of individuation of teteuh; in this chapter, we will analyze the new syntax into which this individuated pagan gods adopted. It's based on the hypothesis that the Aztec "pantheon" ---the hierarchical and orderly selection of deities--- that emerges in the early modern period was not a simple transposition of Mesoamerican teteuh taxonomies nor the process of a progressive scientific discovery of cultural facts. A new series of studies of *etic* deity taxonomies, particularly among the Maya, suggest that the organization of a central Mexican pantheon found in sixteenth-century sources was indeed *emic*. This chapter takes a different perspective, and instead of trying to uncover etic Nahua taxonomies, it proposes to analyze the process and the stages through which an Aztec pantheon was first organized. As I will try to show, this process was not a teleology of discovery, but an essentially contingent process.

While the term "pantheon" was not used to refer to the organized system of gods of ancient Mexico until the eighteenth century, I will argue that it was precisely by reference to Graeco-Roman pantheon and other organizing schemes of antiquity that the earliest organizations of central-Mexican deities took shape. In other words, the emic organization of central-Mexican teteuh was primarily implemented by means of comparisons, or what sixteenth-century writers called "cotejo": an orderly comparison. These comparisons, often explicit but, as we will have opportunity to show, also tacitly, not only filtered out the vast majority of teteuh, but also determined to a large extent the nature and the relations of the figures which came to constitute the Aztec pantheon.

While, as we shall se next, the comparison of ancient Mediterranean deities and Mesoamerican teteuh goes well beyond the sixteenth century, this chapter will focus on three significant moments, moments that both express the hermeneutical possibilities of a certain episteme and had a lasting impact in the understanding of Mesoamerican gods. After a brief overview of what I call the "comparative impulse" and the challenges it posses as an object of historical scrutiny, I will begin by studying the earliest parallel between Graeco-Roman gods and Aztec teteuh I've been able to identify: a text found in Fernández de Oviedo's *Historia general y natural de las Indias*. At a second stage, we will turn our attention to the emergence of more systematic and lengthy "cotejos" around the 1550s, and will focus on the most ambitious comparative venture ever undertaken: Bartolomé de las Casas's *Apologética historia sumaria*. At a third stage, we will address the construction of an integrated Nahua pantheon in the shifting parallels that appear throughout Sahagún's manuscripts.

# 1. Oviedo's *Historia general*: Alignments Across Time and Space

The earliest instance of what could be called an Mexican "pantheon" ---the "gods" presented as an orderly ensemble--- appears in a passage found in Fernández de Oviedo's description of Mexico-Tenochtitlan's Templo Mayor, probably written between 1535 and 1539. The Royal Chronicle describes the deities venerated in the temple by comparing them to the most important Roman gods. The passage is sparse in hard "ethnographic" data ---indeed, as we shall see, in it the Mesoamerican gods go unnamed--- and thus has received but passing cortical attention. However, it is unique in laying bare the various elements through which, like a work of bricolage, a primitive a Mexican pantheon was first organized.

While the passage draws an explicit parallel between Mexican and ancient, and concretely Roman, gods, it sits at the crossroads of a wider arrange of historical referents, historiographic attitudes, and personal experiences. Above all, there is the unique epistemic setting through which Oviedo established himself as the foremost exegete of the New World, the greatest uncovered of its "secrets".[^1] After being named Cronista de Indias in 1532 and Capitan of Santo Doming in {year}, Oviedo established a wide network of correspondents, that stretched to the furthest reaches of Iberian possessions in America and across Europe. This network, together with the fact that the Santo Domingo remained the gateway into the Western Indies well into the sixteenth-century, made available to the Royal Chronicler a great number of personal testimonies, official accounts and private correspondence of important individuals, that he duly transcribed throughout the years in the *minutas* that provided the raw material for his *Historia*. Regarding Mexico, this included Cortés's letters to the Emperor as well as conversations in a number of occasions, as well as the letters of Antonio de Mendoza and several other important figures in the viceroyalty. Finally, since his youth as a courtier in Spain and Italy, Oviedo had been amazing a library, stocked with the works of Classic authors and historians, as well as the Italian writers that Oviedo had acquired during his youth in the Italian Peninsula. In things connected to religion, the figure of Titus Livius's *Ab Urbe Condita* loomed large, a work that the Royal Chronicler regarded not only as a historiographic model, particularly in his writings of Mexico-Tenochtitlan, but as the blueprient for a philosophy of religion: a conception of the role of worship and pagan gods in civic life and political organization. The parallel of Mexican and Roman gods also invoked an unlikely source: the first Spanish exegesis of Dante's *Inferno*. Finally, there was the bedrock of Oviedo's authority: his much vaunted experience. In the context of our discussion, two experiences were fundamental: his familiarity with the campaigns against witchcraft in the Basque provinces and his two-year stay in Nicaragua. While he never visited central Mexico, his description of the central Mexican religious customs and the gods drew on Oviedo unique first-hand experience among the Nicarao people of Nicaragua in 1529, at a time when Spanish sovereignty had yet to be established. In what amounts to the earliest episode of inter-ethnic comparativism in the Americas, Oviedo ascertained ---correctly--- that the Nicaraos where related to central-Mexican Nahuas, 2 thousand km away, in language, customs and their veneration of similar gods. The fortuitous alignment of all these elements and perspectives provided the condition for the earliest formation of knowledge about the Mexican gods, and while aspects of this knowledge would have varying degrees of success, the discursive constellation that it established would prove to be remarkably persistent.[^2]

The passage in question appears in book 33 of the *Historia general*, dedicated to "la conquista e pacificación e población de la Nueva España".[@oviedo1959historia, II, bk. 14 (33), *Proemio*, 8a.] Chapter 46 describes the Templo Mayor of Tenochtitlan, regarded as the symbolic center of Moctezuma's power. Oviedo then describes the main "cues" or "adoratorios" found therein. In so far as they are connected to Moctezuma's power, these sites, and the idols they host, are considered the most important of the land.

> "Avia otros sessenta qües á la redonda del que es dicho, á manera de yglesias ó templos comunes é parrochias, adonde yban los otros señores inferiores é gente más baxa é plebea; pero el mayor, con otros tres oratorios, tenia Montecuma, en que sacrificaba al honor de quatro dioses quél tenia, ó ydolos, que á uno tenia por dios de la guerra, como los gentiles á Marte; é á otro honraba é sacrificaba como á dios de las aguas, segund los antiguos á Neptuno; otro adoraba por dios del viento, segund los perdidos gentiles á Eolo; ó otro acataba por su soberano dios, y este era el sol, en cuyo nombre tenia otro ydolo en mucha veneraçión é acatamiento el señor, é todos sus vassallos. También tenian otros dioses; é á uno hacían dios de los mahiçales, é le atribuian la potencia de la guarda é multiplicación dellos, como á Çerere los fabulosos poetas ó antiguos gentiles. É á cada cosa tenian un dios, atribuyéndole lo que se les antojaba, é dándoles la deidad que no tienen, ni se debe dar sino solo á Dios verdadero."[@oviedo1855historia, bk 33, ch. 46, 503.]

This is not the first time Oviedo described the temples nor the idols venerated in Mexico-Tenochtitlan, nor is it the most vibrant of these. In earlier passages, Oviedo described in detail and characteristic ecfrastic gusto the "principal e más magnifico" of the temples in Mexico and the "bultos e cuerpo de los ídolos" venereated in Mexico.[@oviedo1959historia, II, bk. 14 (33), ch. 10, 47-8, and ch. 11, 48-9.] But this is the first time in which the gods that those idols were presumed to embody are defined by their function and understood as a system. The gods become somewhat detached from the materiality of the idol, which had captured the full attention of all previous writers, including Hernán Cortés, the main source of this book of the *Historia*. Oviedo was perhaps the first to abstract the gods from the idols, and to individuate them not in terms of their (physical) form but rather, by means of their ritual function or the realm over which they were deemed to preside. This seemingly subtle change, the fragmentations of *teteuh* ensembles into individualized figures presiding over a specific realm of nature or social life, has had lasting repercussions. It brought Mesoamerican religion in line with what J. G. Frazer would call "propitiatory worship," an interpretation that to this day remains largely unquestioned or problematized.[^3] Secondly, as noted by Gillespie and Joyce, the one-to-one correspondence between individual "gods" with rain, war, wind, maize or the sun, maize, etc. has produced a lasting and pernicious conflations of figures across geography time and space. Once a simple referential bond becomes fixed, every Mesoamerica deity related to the same referent, is assumed to be identical, often across milenia.[^4] Finally, the it could be argued that the individuation by function and realm of action along Western notions of nature and society was instrumental in the development of the influential *Naturmythologie* of Eduard Seler and the Americanist school of Berlin, according to which religious phenomena were to be understood as veiled mimetic representation of natural cycles.[@seler1990collected, IV, 149-175; @neurath2015escalera .]

It's important to note that, in Oviedo's passage, this first redefinition of the Mexican gods takes place by means of a comparison with Roman gods.[Gillespie and Joyce noted that the identification of Mexican gods with "natural phenomena" and "cultural categories" was probably based on perceived similarities with Graeco-Roman gods, but only mentioned Book I of the *Florentine Codex*, a relatively late example. -@gillespie1998deity, 280b.] A previous passage of book 33 already signaled in this direction: "E a cada cosa tienen su ídolo dedicado, al uso de los gentiles," a passage strongly reminiscent of Augustine's disparaging characterization of ancient paganism in the *City of God.*[^5] But in the passage under examination, the parallel is fully developed.

Oviedo presents 5 pagan gods as equivalents to those venerated in Moctezuma's Templo Mayor: Mars ("dios de la guerra"), Neptune ("dios de las aguas"), Sol ("soberano dios"), Aeolus ("dios del viento") and Ceres ("dios de los mahizales"). As noted before, the fact that, with the exception of Aeolus, these gods are Roman ---and, in fact, closely related to the city of Rome--- is significant, and we shall discuss it shortly.[^6] But before, let's consider the specific parallel up close. In one of the few extant discussions on Oviedo's passage, the ethnohistorian Guillaume Olivier briefly
identified some of the figures under question: Mars should be identified with Huitzilopochtli, Neptune with Tlaloc, and Aeolus with Quetzalcoatl [@olivier2010panteon, 394-395.] The rationale seems so obvious that is not even explained: Huitzilillopochtli is generally characterized as the god of war, Tlaloc is associated to water, and Quetzalcóatl, at least in what is supposed to be his "advocation" as Ehécatl-Quetzalcoatl, hold a connection to the wind ('ehecatl' meaning wind.) However, as we shall see, the identifications are far from having clear, unambiguous referents, as they bring together two fields that in their internal constitution and structural relations are incommensurable.[^7] The fact that these parallels seem self-evident today evinces the great success of this heuristic hypothesis. Let's proceed to disassemble them.

In the first chapter of this dissertation we have discussed the shifting identifications of Huitzilopochtli as Mars or Hercules, and it's ideological implications. As we showed, Oviedo was largely responsible for the characterization of Huitzilopochtli as Mars, and by extension as the "god of war," by means of perceived affinities between the foundation of Rome and the foundation of Mexico-Tenochtitlan.[^8] Most other authors, particularly those writing in New Spain, favored an identification with Hercules, thus establishing parallel between Mexican and Castillian antiquities, and suggesting the legitimacy of non-noble military rulership. Given that many sources claim that a "bulto" of Huitzilopochtli presided the north section{check} of the Templo Mayor, this identification, at least, seems to be unproblematic.[^9]. The identification of Tláloc with Neptune is already more intriguing. On the one hand, the association of both figures because of their association with water seems natural and felicitous, and yet it was never taken up by later writers, including those like Las Casas or Torquemada who systematized the parallelism between Mexican and Graeco-Roman deities. On the other hand, while the \*Florentine Codex" claims that the "adoratorio" devoted to Tlaloc sat next to the one devoted to Huitzillopochtli, other sources descent. Bernal Díaz claimed that the "bulto" ---that he minutely describes--- found in it was not Tlaloc, but Tezcatlipoca, while Torquemada claimed it was Tlacahuepan Cuexcochtzin and Paynalton, two figures associated to Hutzillopochtli.[^10] As for Aeolus, the greek god of wind that figures prominently in Homer but that Oviedo took from Virgil's Aeneid, the discovery in 2017 of a round plataform across from the Templo Mayor has lent credence to sixteent-century reports according to which Ehécatl was venerated in the prescint.[^11] The identification of Ehécatl-Quetzalcoatl with Aeolus, given both figure's relation to wind seems natural, and raises the question of why later writers did not follow upon Oviedo's lead.[^12] Furthermore, it's remarkable that according to other sources, as well a archaeology, the presence of Ehecatl in the Templo Mayor was not through a "bulto" or "ídolo", but rather through the architectural features.{check}

The two remaining parallels are harder to pin down. In the case of Ceres, the problem lays in the simple fact that "diosa de los mahizales" could refer to a large number of female *teteuh* who had associations with corn.[^13] Almost half a century later, Sahagún drew upon the Roman goddess Ceres to identify one of them, Chicomecoatl, who the Spanish text describes as "la diosa de los mantenimiento".[^14] Following Sahagún's lead, historians tend to distinguish between this "diosa de los mantenimientos" and the corn goddess, generally identified with Centéotl (*centli*: "maçorca de maiz" \[Olmos, 1547\]).[^15] But the structural equivalence between the two passages where Oviedo introduced these denominations suggests that he used them as synonymous.

The case of Sol is even more complex. While throughout the sixteenth-century a consensus emerged that regarded Tezcatlipoca ---whose "idol" sat next Huitzillopochtli at the highest platform of the Templo Mayor--- as the "soberano dios" of the Mexicans, solar associations of particular *teteuh* abound.[^16] Huitzillopochlti, for instance, according to Cortés and Antonio de Mendoza's letters, was associated to the sun. And according to Tezozomoc, Piltzinteuctli, another figure identified with Tonatiuh was also present at the Templo.

## Inter-American Comparisons

It has been suggested that Oviedo's descriptions of the Nicaros in Nicaragua could have been influenced by his knowledge of Mexico.[^17] At the same time, is equally likely that his view of Mexico was influence by his very direct and detailed knowledge of the Nicaros. In Book on history of Nicaragua, he notes that one of the peoples of Nicaragua spoke the same language as the Mexicans, and shared a number of customs. Oviedo not only had first hand experience of the Nicaros even before they were conquered by the Spanish, but later, when he was preparing the *Historia*, transcribed the important account of Bobadilla, that delved quite deeply in the beliefs and customs of the Nicaros. In his account of the Nicaragua, Oviedo wrote that the Nicaros venerated the same gods of war, wind, water, etc.

It was during Oviedo's third stay in America (1526 - 1530), particularly 1528, where he visited Nicaragua. According to his own testimony, he interviewed the old cacique of Tecoatega, "por otro nombre llamado Viejo, e su propio nombre era Agateyete", on January 2, 1528. @oviedo1855historia, {page}\]. The other important document on the ceremonies and rites of the Nicaraos, the Mercedarian friar Bobadilla's *Información*, that Oviedo included verbatim in his *Historia*, was also compiled in 1528. However,the section devoted to Nicaragua was written much later, between 1540 and 1548. By the time Oviedo actually wrote down his information on the Nicaraos, he had not only had at his disposition a wealth of information stemming from Mexico, including the letters by the Viceroy Antonio de Mendoza and Cortés's letters to the Emperor, but had already completed the books on Mexico in the *Historia*. This is important because, as noted by Miguel León-Portilla, this explains why when Oviedo wrote about the Nicaraos he stated from the outset that the Nicaraos spoke the same language as the Mexicans and that they had many religious ceremonies in common.[@portilla1972nicaraos, 24. Speaking of the language spoken in the "gobernación de Nicaragua", Oviedo noted that "la principal es la que llaman de Nicaragua y es la mesma que hablan en México o en la Nueva España", and that "muchos ritos tienen éstos de Nicaragua, como los de la Nueva España".{refs}] León-Portilla also noted the fact that Oviedo used the term "orchilobos" to refered to Nicarao temples, a "manifiesta interpolación" that, he suggests, Oviedo could have picked from reading Cortés's mention of Huitzilopochtli (Orchilobos) in his letters. The matter is, in fact, more complex, for in his comments on Mendoza's account of the foundation of Mexico, Oviedo holds the hypothesis that in fact, the Mexicans came from the south, precisely from Nicaragua.[^18]

## The Digressions

It is remarkable that the two brief but telling digressions that follow the parallel establish some of the discursive coordinates and symbolic horizons within which the Mesoamerican gods would continued to be thought of during the early modern period: anti-superstition literature and Graeco-Roman antiquity.

The early sixteenth century saw the development in Spain of an anti-superstition literature, based on the historical events of heresy and witchcraft, particularly in the Basque diocese of Calahorra, Logroño and Durango.[@bazan2011supersticion]. The historical connections between this experiences and this literature, and New Spain are extensive and have been well studied. As is well known, Bisho Zumárraga, first bishop of Mexico, had previously been in charge of the persecution of witchcraft in the Basque country, and thus the Basque experience will inform the policy of the suppression of idolatry in New Spain. One of Zumarraga's accolades, also from the Basque country, fray Andrés de Olmos, translated Castanega's famous treatise on superstition to Nahuatl, in México. According to Del Río, Oviedo held a copy of Castañega's treatise in his library at Santo Domingo, a book to which he would have access when writing on the antiquities of Mexico around 1535. However, Oviedo had a more direct familiarity with Basque events. But let's begin by analyzing the digression in question.

The first digression appears right after the parallel:

> "É á aquellos quatro ó cinco dioses principales que se han dicho de susso, sacrificaba Monteçuma cada un año, en ciertos tiempos diferentes, más de cinco mill personas, por consejo de dos demonios, que decían los indios que andaban en aquellos qües, que hablaban con ellos é los traian engañados, como lo estuvieron largos tiempos muchas gentes, é aun lo están hoy por el mundo. Si no, preguntadlo á essos brujos é brujas, é aun á essotros hereges de la peña de Amboto é sus secaçes de la condenada seíta de fray Alonso de Mella." [@oviedo1855historia, bk. xxxiii, ch. 46, 503]

Oviedo frames the veneration of gods as instilled by "two demons" and thus as superstitious, and refers of the events of the Basque country as examples of the persistence of these practices all the way to the present. The Royal Chronicler was in fact fusing two distinct events, separated for over 70 years. [^19] The first event was the well-documented case that took place in Durango in the 1440s: the "gran heregía" led by fray Antonio de Mella.[^20] The second refers to the outbreak of witchcraft cases that took hold of Vizcaya during the early years of the 16th century. During the period, according to some sources, dozens of people were burned in the stake accused of . This brief mention by the Royal Chronicler is in fact one of the few dozen surviving testimonia of the events, but it was largely responsible for establishing a historiographic connection between the heretical movement of Mella, a claim that has recently been called into question.[^21] The events in question took place between 1499 and 1508. According to his own testimony in the *Quinquagenas*, Oviedo spent most of 1504 in Tavira de Durango and, a few years later, in 1506, was appointed "notario apostólico y secretario del Consejo de la Santa Inquisición".[@oviedo1880quiquagenas, II, E, 23, fol. 49; -@oviedo1983batallas, prol., xvii. Bazan fails to note that Oviedo was actually present around Amboto, which lends at least some credence to his claim that the witchcraft cases might have been in fact related to Mella's group's ideas.] This places Oviedo in strangely similar situation to that of that other duranguense of great importance for New Spain: fray Juan de Zumárraga, who also left testimony of the Amboto withcracft cases, albeit in a more skeptical tone strongly reminiscent of the the older approach to witchcraft claims in the *Canonici*. It must also be remembered that one the earliest mentions of at least one of this *teteuh*, Tezcatlipoca, appears in manuals of confession that draw upon this anti-superstitious literature.

Oviedo's commentary is brief, as is aimed at instilling in the reader a sense of the reality of Mexico-Tenochtitlán's Templo Mayor and the sacrifices order there by Moctezuma. And yet, it's worth asking whether Oviedo's comparisson of both phenomena was based in anything more than passing condemnation of the persistence of superstition. While far from conclusive, an interesting clue is gound in the one printed account on the witches of Amboto available at the time when Oviedo took to write about Moctezuma's temple. The account, first identified by Menéndez Pelayo, appears in an unlikely source: in the commentary that accompanies the one 16th-century Spanish translation of Dante's *Inferno*, published by Pedro Fernández de Villegas in 1515.[@villegas1515infierno, Canto IX, 127-129; Canto XX, {verse}. For the classic discussion on the passage, see @pelayo2017heterodoxos, vol. III, chap. 7, 304-5.] In his classic study on Oviedo, Antonello Gerbi already documented the Royal Chronicler's veritable passion for Dante, and according to the studies of Deymond Turner, in the Oviedo's library in Santo Domingo, a Tuscan edition of the *Commedia* sat quite likely next to a copy of Villegas's translation.[^22]

Villegas's account of the heresies and witchcraft of Vizcaya appear in his commentaries to some verses found in the IX and XX Canto. The first verse is the one in which Dante comes across the open sepulchers of heresiarchs (IX, 127-129).[^23] The second, revolves around the fate of the fortunetellers ("'ndivine"), which Villegas translated as "xorquinas", a Basque word use for witches (XX, 121-123).[^24] It's important to remember that the IX Canto is one in which Dante considered figures of pagan Antiquity, such as Eryton and the Furies, and that according to Landino's *Comento*---Villegas's main exegetical sources on the *Commedia*---were "muerjes hechiceras y nigrománticas."[^25]. Villega's commentary on both Cantos emphasise the assimilation of ancient idolatries and Dante's material to recent events in the persecution of witchcraft and heresies. Oviedo's own resort to the events of Amboto elicit the same sense of contemporaneity and proximity to a phenomenon that would otherwise might seem remote. Two telling details are the shared used of the "secuaces" word, that both Villegas and Oviedo might have derived.

The second digression, fulfills the paragon, so characteristic of Oviedo, by reframing the theme under discussion within a Ancient, and concretely Roman imaginary. Much can be learned from a careful reading of the cues and references in this digression. The second digression makes clear Oviedo's deep influence of ancient Rome in understand New World religious phenomena, and concretely, and imaginary and an overarching understanding of pagan religion as understood by Titus Livy. This is particularly striking in his understanding of Mesoamerican deities and religious practices. This is the quote:

> "¿Y qué diremos de aquellos famosos romanos é de sus templos , que ni eran de más sanctidad ni de menos que los de aquestos indios, errores é desvarios fundados, pues que á cada cosa que se les antojaba hacian dios ó su templo, como hiço Rómulo, que ordenó al dios Júpiter un templo, é púsole nombre Jove ferretro, donde fuessen ofresçidas las armas y enseñas de los reyes é capitanes que oviessen ávido de los enemigos que oviessen muerto? É assi mesmo, como, escribió Livio, Rómulo ordenó aquel templo llamado Estatorio, porque estuviessen quedos é no huyessen los romanos en aquella cruda batalla con los sabinos, quando las piadosas mugeres sabinas despartieron á los padres é maridos de aquel notable combatimiento? El templo de la Dea de la Salud, constituyó Bubulco Çensor por la guerra de los samnites. Pues demás de los dioses vanos, también tenian por diosas á Vénus, Palas, Juno é otras muchas. Demás desso, qué subjetos á sus auríspices é adevinos fueron! é qué agoreros é obidientes á vanidades, fundadas sobre religiosidad é falsa sanctimonia! Quiero decir, que si miramos las cosas de los gentiles en este caso, por tan profanas é diabólicas las tenemos como las de nuestras Indias."[@oviedo1855historia, XXXIII, 46, 503.]

The second digression mentions a number of concrete places of Rome's religious landscape, gleaned from Livy's *Ab Urbe Condita *. Oviedo mentions the {temples}. Oviedo frames these temples as exempla of the way in which Roman generals and rulers manipulated their forces, appeasing the populace and the troops, by such acts of public piety. In the actual digressions, Oviedo conceives of Mocteuma's religious ceremonies and sacrifices as a way to exert his political power. In doing so, Oviedo seems to mirror not only Livian material, but also Livy's general attitude to religion.

Oviedo seems to mirror Livy's own ambiguous approach to religion. As scholars have noted, Livy's approach to Roman religion, particularly to prodigies and the supernatural intervention is fundamentally ambiguous: on the one hand, he duly report prodigies and purported divine interventions, on the other he seems to subject them to a general skepticism. Similarly, in a single stroke, Oviedo both reports the information and dismisses it as fable and follies, and his criticism of fable is unforgivin. And yet, in the same as was for Livy, religion, particularly under the guise of public piety and ordered sacrifices, is essential to power and the city. And yet, as scholars have noted, Livy's dismissal of prodigies and divine intervention in history might in fact be an inherent part of Roman public religion; on the other, as recently noted by one scholar, regardless of his criticism, the *Ab Urbe Condita* does establish a causal connection between the fulfillment of public piety and military piety. Oviedo's attentive reading of Livy preserves that much, and for the Royal Chronicler, there's nothing more natural than captains and princes invoking the power of their gods to secure power and military might.

# 2. Gods Everywhere: An Integrated Religious Antiquity

"Mucho \[se\] quieren parecer las fábulas de los indios a las de los antiguos en sus templos e idolatrías."[@oviedo1959historia, bk ?(45), ch. 11, {page}]. Theses words summarized Fernández de Oviedo's attitude towards the parallel between American and Graeco-Roman antiquities. An attitude not devoid of paradox: if for Oviedo the parallels were based on perceived similarities between the foundational histories of Rome and New Spain, we was on the other hand keenly aware of the absence of factual historical connections.[^26] As already noted by David Lupher, Oviedo even argued, in a rare piece of anti-difussionist ---and perhaps even pre-Adamite--- that th discoveries of various arts and industries should be regarded that the discoveries of various arts and industries should be regarded as multi-focal and hence could not be brought to a single history of discovery.[@lupher2006romans, {pages}]

A decade after Oviedo, several writers took the comparison again, albeit in a more detailed and systematic fashion. These authors were far better prepared to undertake the task; for if Oviedo dabbled in Ancient historiography and was a keen reader of Livy and Pliny, he was not a humanist, his knowledge of Latin was limited, etc. The case was different with a series of authors that took to writing on these topics around the mid-sixteenth century. Drawing on the privilege position of the Escorial, and the expansive network of Las Casas, this projects were better suited to undertake the task, and they did it by drawing on a very different intellectual genealogy than Oviedo.

This is the case the Jesuit humanist and bibliographer Juan Páez de Castro (c.1512 -- 1570), the Dominican fray Bartolomé de las Las Casas (1484 -- 1566) and the Augustian fray Jerónimo de Román y Zamora (1536 - 1597). Two of these figures had strong connections of the Escorial: Paéz de Castro was involved in drafting it's original plan, and Jerónimo de Román was its librarian. The Spanish historian Carmelo Saez was among the first to note that Paez, Las Casas and Román the continuity found among these various intellectual ventures. [^27] Writting at different moments, this ventury would produce two important works: the *Apologética historia sumaria* by Las Casas and the *Repúblicas del mundo* by Román.

In the *Memorial de las cosas necesarias para escribir historia* (1555) dedicated to Charles V, the Jesuit humanist and bibliographer Juan Páez de Castro (c.1512 -- 1570) claimed to be at work on a treatise on the topic.

> "De todo esto tenemos exemplo bastante en las cosas de las indias en aprobación de lo que los autores dicen, y lo mostraré más largamente en un tratado que hago de la conformidad que hay entre las costumbres, y religiones destos indios occidentales con las antiguas que los historiadores escriben de estas partes que nosotros habitamos."[^28]

The context of the discussion suggests that Paez de Castro not only had access to the manuscript works of the historians who wrote about the Indies ---indeed, his correspondence shows that he received two manuscripts by Pedro Ciezas de León[^29]--- but also to the "libros de pinturas", confirming the poems and songs with which peoples from across the world had preserved their histories before the invention of the alphabet.{ref} Páez de Castro, who was a long-time aide and protégé of the famous Diego Hurtado de Mendoza and Francisco de Mendoza y Bobadilla, Bishop of Burgos---brother and nephew to the first viceroy of Mexico---would have been in an incomparable position to undertake such project: schooled in Greek, Latin, Arabic and Hebrew, he had access to Hurtado de Mendoza's priced collection of Greek manuscripts and was a collector of manuscripts himself. It seems plausible that, through his connections with the Mendozas, he would have access to the pictorial manuscripts and historical documents from New Spain that he discuss in the *Memorial*, such as the one that Antonio had sent to Hurtado de Mendoza in Venice according to Ramusio. Unfortunately, neither the treatise nor the papers related to the project survived.

During the same years, fray Bartolomé de las Casas was also at work in his own version of comparison between the religious antiquities of the Indies and the ancient world. The result of these efforts were the *Apologética historia sumaria*, a book that would remain unpublished but would be the source material for Román y Zamora's *Repúblicas del mundo*. While Las Casas' work would remain unpublished in the early modern period, his work would be thoroughly used by the Augustinian fray Jerónimo de Román, librarian of the Escorial. Building upon the comparative spirit of both Paez and Las Casas, Jerónimo Román expanded his comparison to all "republic of the world".\] By organizing them under the general scheme of "repúblicas cristianas" and "repúblicas gentílicas," he was able to go further than Las Casas in showing that pagan or non-Christian societies were indeed republics organized politically. The denomination was fortunate, and when the last great chronicler, Antonio de Torquemada, wrote his "chronicle of chronicles", we would draw extensively on Las Casas and Jerónimo Román, to frame his lengthy exposition of New World "repúblicas gentícias".

Unlike Oviedo, whose sole frame of reference was Livy, Paez de Castro, Las Casas and Román y Zamora drew upon a wide range of Renaissance traditions. Important among them were the "invented antiquities"of Annius de Viterbo, who in the eve of the sixteent-century had already transformed antiquity into an universal framework that went far beyond the confines of the Graeco-Roman worlds. For Viterbo, Antiquity provided the missing link between all European nations and histories, and his work, edited and well known in Spain, already provided a blueprint for an enlarged antiquity. Secondly, there was Johannes Boemus, writing just 2 decades later, Antiquity was the universal background of humankind. His widely popular compendia, the *Omnius gentium mores, leges, ritus, ex multis clarissimis rerum scriptobus* (1520), showed the breath and the extension that Antiquity had reached in the early Renaissance; a concept much larger than the one that the 18th century, in the wake of Wincklemnan, would narrow down to the "Classical world." In 1556, the Gaditan humanist Francisco de Támara translated Boemus' work as *El Libro de las costumbres de todas las gentes del mundo*, updating it to incorporate the new discoveries by appending a short "Suma y breve relación de todas las Indias y tierras nuevamente descubiertas por gente de España." For all their novelty, the territories in the West were firmly grounded in the human landscape---the *mores, leges et ritus*--- of a global Antiquity. In the case of Las Casas, furthermore, he resorted to some of the monuments of cinquecento antiquarian eruditions, such as Giraldi, whose *syntagmas* he often references in his work.

## Las Casas's "Gran Cotejo" and a Pan-New-Spanish Pantheon

In order to prove the existence of "prudencia política" ---that is, of civic society--- among indigenous peoples of the New World, Las Casas analyses the existence of all the elements that according to the *Politicorum* are signs of political organization. Under the sixth heading ---namely, the existence of an organized priesthood--- Las Casas embarked on a protracted exposition of religious institutions and practices throughout the New World. However, in stead of presenting a descriptions of indigenous customs, Las Casas conceived this lengthy exposition ---of over 123 chapters--- as a "demorado cotejo" between Mediterranean, European and American societies. This grand tableau of religious antiquity on a world scale, written during the mid-sixteenth century, is unprecedented not only in scope, but also in grounding the historical existence of idolatry and the worship of pagan gods in a new philosophical anthropology.

In an important theoretical chapter, Las Casas presented the argument according to which idolatry, far from constituting a deviation from the Second commandment, was in fact an expression of the inclination of the rational soul towards worship.[^30] Drawing on the *Politicorum*, Aquinas, and on a keen reading of William of Auvergne's *De legibus*, Las Casas argued that the inclination towards worship was natural regardless of whether the object of worship was true (God) or false (the pagan gods).[^31] On the legal side, drawing on canon law and Ulpian, Las Casas claimed that the easily attested universality of paganism proved that it should be consider part of *ius gentium*, and hence a hallmark of political society. Within this theological and legal framework, the aim of this section of the *Apologética* was to show through sheer accumulation of evidence not only the existence of idolatry, but also the "sobrepujamiento" of the New World's religious antiquity to that of the Graeco-Roman world.

Regarding the nature of pagan gods, an interesting argument on the nature of the gods appear also in this theoretical chapter. In so far as this argument frames the exposition of American, and particularly Mexican, gods, it is worth reconstructing in some detail. The question that Las Casas addresses is why are there so many gods, the existence of "la multitud de los dioses."

The presentation of the gods of Mexico in the *Apologética historia sumaria* starts by acknowledging that, among the various regions of the Indies, New Spain is remarkable for the sheer number of gods and idols there are: "no tenían número, ni se pudiera con suma diligencia por muchas personas solícitas contar." Las Casas claims to have personally seen an infinite number of them, made of precious metals as well as clay, wood and seeds, but also paited. Curiously, Las Casas brought under the same rubric both monumental sculpture and figurines ("de bulto, chicas y grandes") as well as painted manuscripts ("figuras pintadas de pincel"). While some of these figures had certain recurring features ---such as headdresses that resembled bishop miters, or mortar-like receptacles on top of their head--- and human form, many other exhibited animal forms, such as lions, tigers, dogs or deer, as well as many kinds of serpents, toads, fish and serpents. They also had gods shaped as the sun, the moon and the stars. [^32]

This great variety of forms, understood as direct figurative referents, indicate the specific field of influence, along the lines of the Augustinian trope according to which pagan gods held propitiatory roles: "Teían dios para la tierra, otro de la mar, otro de las aguas, otro para guardar el vino, otro para las sementeras." But Las Casas goes one step further in claiming that beyond such general categories, "para cada especie tenían un dios." Thus, there was a god for corn, another for wheat, and yet another for chickpeas or beans, etc. This fragmentation explained the infinite number of idols and gods found New Spain, an abundance that Las Casas remarks time and again. [^33]

Underlying this great multitude of deities, however, there was an organized hierarchy. Above all, a supreme god, represented by the sun, and whose task was to protect heaven and earth. Secondly, there was a class of gods that mediated the relation between people and the supreme god, protecting the people ("guardadores de los hombres") and interceding before the supreme god ("como abogados ante aquel gran dios". Among these principal gods, Las Casas mentions the "gran diosa de los cielos" who was venetated in a fragrant grove on top of a sierra by the Totonoacas, and who they regarded as an "abogada ante el gran dios."[@lascasas1967apologetica, ch. 121, 639.]

Finally, 122 introduced a third kind of "gods":

> "Veneraban y adoraban también por dioses a los hombres que habían hecho algunas hazañas señaladas o inventado cosas nuevas en favor y utilidad de la república, o porque dieron leyes y reglas de vivir, o les enseñaron oficios o sacrificios, o algunas otras cosas que les parecían buenas y dignas de ser satisfechas con obras de agradecimiento."[@lascasas1967apologetica, ch. 122, 643.]

The third kind of gods were in fact deified rulers. In this passage, Las Casas condenses the euhemeristic interpretation of myth with the heurematic tradition (the literature on inventation), in a way that is characteristic of two of the most important sources on the ancient world used in the *Apologética historia sumaria*: Giovanni Boccaccio's great compendium of ancient myth, the *Genealogia deorum*, and Polydore Virgil's *De inventoribus rebus.*[^34] It's important to note that, within this double tradition of euhemerism and heurematism that the *Apologética* folds into it's own argument, the "invention" of sacrifices and the worship of gods was one of the primordial civilizing feats of founding rulers, equivalent in importance to legislation, the invention of trades such as agriculture, commerce, etc. Thus, in one of the theoretical chapters on the necessary conditions for the existence of a political society, Las Casas presents the paradigmatic example of Lysanias, a Greek Levantine king that Boccaccio, following the Pseudo-Theodontius, identified as the first Jupiter.[^35] Lysanias, an Athenian by birth, brought to his uncivilized people, who lived "sin política," an orderly city life, the rule of a common law, the institution of marriage and, most importantly, an organized system of worship: priests, temples, altars and sacrifices. Significantly, when describing the institutions of worship, Las Casas deliberately underplays the distinction between true and false worship with a laconic, yet striking sleight of hand: Lysanias "dióles doctrina, reglas y modo como sirviesen y honrasen *a Dios o a los dioses.* And for these reasons, in gratitude for his services, "honráronlo y tuviéronlo por Dios y llamáronlo Júpiter y hiciéronle rey suyo."[@lascasas1967apologetica, ch. 48. Las Casas does not his direct source, but the whole passage is practically a transcription of the [-@boccaccio2011genealogia], bk II, ch. 2, 193.]

With the exception of Tláloc, mentioned as an after thought in the very last line of the chapter on the gods of Mexico, and occasional mentions of the "dios de las lluvias", the bulk of Las Casas's discussion of Mexican gods largely ignores the most well-known central Mexican figures associated with nature or aspects of social life, and focuses instead on this purported deified rulers.[^36] Chapter 122 discusses 4 deified rulers: Huitzillopochtli, Tezcatliploca, Camaxtli and Quetzalcoatl. All of these figures ---including, quite surprisingly, Tezcatlipoca--- are firmly placed within the apotheosic scheme, and to the extent that they are all presented as American Lysaniases, they are all related to specific political entities: Huitzillopochtli to Mexico-Tenochtitlan, Tezcatlipoca to Texcoco, Camaztli to Tlaxcala and Huejotzingo, and Quetzalcoatl to Cholula. As we shall now see in detail, Las Casas constructed what could be regarded as the first truly New Spanish pantheon; that is, the first arbitrary selection of a group of deities that is no longer the sublimation of entrenched and partisan *altepetl* hegemonic claims ---particularly Mexico-Tenochtitlan--- but rather an integration of more universal claims, even if this "universalism" is of course limited by the contingency of the sources available to Las Casas[^37] and overdetermined by a new set of hegemonic claims, particularly those that gravitate towards the emerging preponderance of Quetzalcoatl.

## Lysanias in the New World

The first deified king that Las Casas discuss is Huitzilopochtli, "cuya estatua estaba en el templo grande y principal de la ciudad."[^38] Huitzilopochtli gave its name to Tenochtitlan and his own arms ---the prickly pear--- are now part of the city's coat of arms.[^39] Huitzilopochtli bears the traits of founder that Las Casas would have read in Motolinía's manuscripts, to which he had access.\[{source}\] Las Casas stresses Huitzilopochtli's role as civil and religious leader: he enlarged the city and undertook the construction of its famous "calzadas," but also organized the "templos y safricicios y cereminas de cultu divino." As part of these reforms, he introduced for the first time human sacrifice, which had never been practiced before. [@lascasas1967apologetica, ch. 122, 644.] During his lifetime, Huitzilopochtli "quiso que lo celebrasen por dios," but according to Las Casas, with considerably less arrogance than other famous rulers of ancient history, with whom he proceeds to compare him. These figures are gleaned form the Biblical and Roman histories, but their election does not seem haphazard, as their stories bear specific similarities with elements of the Huitzilopochtli material. Thus, Huitzilopochtli compares favorably to Nebuchadnezzar, who dispatched Holofernes, one of his generals, "para que todos los dioses de la tierra extirpase" so that only he be worshiped as a god.[^40] And also with the Roman Emperor Caligula, who proclaimed himself son of Jupiter and established his own worship, with exquisite sacrifices, throughout the empire, and had a golden statue in his image place at a temple in Rome. In this temple, Caligula ordered the sacrifice of "pavones y faisanes y otras aves preciosísimas y costos".[^41] Las Casas then suggests a closer parallel to Herodes Agrippa, who "poco menos que aquéllos con su soberbia ofendió", because he merely tolerated the "divinos honores" given to him by his sycophantic people, which nevertheless was grave enough for God to send him a pest.[^42] Thus, the parallels that Las Casas establishes with Huitzillopochtli are neither gods (Mars) nor heroes (Hercules), but famous kings who established their own worship in their kingdoms. In this regard, rather than euhemeristic, his model should be described as apotheosic.

In a similar fashion than Fernández de Oviedo's *Historia general*, the Templo Mayor appears as a natural organizing principle of the pantheon. For early writers, the presence of certain gods at the symbolic heart of Moctezuma's power expressed the importance attributed to them, and while writers noted the *huei teocalli* of other altepetl such as Tlatelolco, Texcoco or Tlaxcala rivaled Tenochtitlan's in grandeur and importance, it was Tenochtitlan's Templo Mayor that became the object of lengthy descriptions and visual representation. Scholars have reconstructed in detail how the earliest first-hand descriptions of the temple's layout and architecture were adapted, condensed and misread, resulting in a set of fanciful features that only the beginning of archeological excavations by Leon y Gama in the late 1780s was able to dispel.[^43] This teleology of progressive scientific discovery, however, tends to obscure the fact that even the earlier source provide considerably diverging accounts of the Temple. This is particularly striking in the case of the teteuh that are said to have been venerated in Templo Mayor. The teleological narrative that finds truth only in the corroboration of the archaeological record has prevented to ask other kinds of questions, for example, about possible political or ideological motives behind the attribution of a different set of deities to the temple. In order to gage Las Casas unique pantheon, let's briefly overview of the various identifications of gods Tenochtitlan's Templo.

In the 1530 edition of *De Orbe Novo*, Anghiera, collating information gleaned mostly from Cortés's letters and perhaps Andrés de Tapia's account of the Conquest, was the first to assert the identity of the main "marble statue" (*marmoreo simulacro*) in the temple as Huitzillopochtli (lit.: "Uulchilabuchichi"), and compared it's great height with the Colossus of Rhodes.[@anghiera1530deorbe, dec. V, ch. 4, f. 72r. See @boone1987research 7-8, though, by following a translation mistake in MacNutt's English version of the *Decades* (New York, 1912), she claims that Anghiera wrote that the sculpture "was also accompanied by three human statues" (8), when in fact he wrote that the sculpture's height was that of three men ("virilium statura\[rx\] triu\[n\]", fol. 72r.), which makes sense in the context of a comparison with the Colossus.] The presence of a single, a ---literally--- colossal sculpture crowning the Templo Mayor was consistent with the famous Nuremberg map of Tenochtitlan, in which Cortés indeed presented at the center of the double temple a depiction of a figure reminiscent of the famous statue.{figure} In 1552, Gómara, using the same materials plus some manuscripts by Motolonía, identified the second great idol at the Templo Mayor as Tezcatlipoca.[@boone1987research, 8-9. Boone believes that Gómara might also have had access to other now lost sources.] Diego Durán and Acosta, using material from the lost *Cronica X*, identified the second sculpture as Tláloc, and this was taken up by most later historians such as Solis, Clavijero up until Prescott. However, other Franciscans historians offered slightly different identifications. Sahagún, for example, while confirming the presence of Tláloc, identified the main idol with Huitzillopochtli or Tlacuepan Cuezochtzin; Torquemada considered these two different figures, and added Paynal as the third idol, probably based on Bernal Díaz, who also described a third idol even though he didn't recall its name. Finally, in 1598, the noble Nahua historian Fernando de Alvarado Tezozómoc would provide a much larger list of the gods venerated in the temple by the seven calupulli of the city.[^44] As we shall now see, Las Casas's list is unique among sixteenth-century sources.

In an earlier chapter on the city of Mexico-Tenochtitlan, Las Casas described the "magnífico templo" at the heart of Tenochtitlan, and described some of the oratories and smaller temples found therein. In his description of the Templo, he noted the presence of two large sculptures, "grandes como gigantes"[^45] located at the two wooden structures at the topo of the temple.[^46] And in chapter 122, he clarifies that one of those monumental idols was that of Huitzilopochtli. Next to this, two other sculptures represented either his sons or brothers: these were Tezcatlipoca and Camaxtli. These two brother build and ruler over Texcoco and Tlaxcala, respectively, and "ordenaron sus ritos y sacrificios. For these reasons, after their deaths, their people "los tuvieron y veneraron por sus dioses." Las Casas recounts two short myths, told by the peoples of Texcoco and Talxcala, that relate these founding figures to the "Sierra Nevada" mountains and volcanoes close to them.[^47]

The two rulers belonged to the people called Chichimecas, and "fueron grandes capitanes esforzados" who ruled by agreement or sheer force, the provinces of México, Texcoco and Tlaxcala, whose original inhabitants were the Otomies. Readers will be familiar with this narrative, one the numerous iterations of Chichimec migration so widespread in sixteenth-century sources. It's likely that Las Casas drew upon the earliest and most detailed account of this migration by Motolinía, that we have studied in the Chapter 1, even though he introduced, by means of a digression on Livy, Solinus, and other ancient authors, the idea that the Otomies were the "aborigenes," that is, the people whose origin was so remote as to be unknown.[^48] Such characterization of the Otomies evokes once again the legendary foundation of Rome, but now it is conceived not only as the model for the foundation of Mexico-Tenochtitlán, as in Oviedo, but rather as the blueprint for the foundation of the most important *altepeme* in the valley of Mexicza. This grander scheme becomes more evident if we consider the identity of Huitzilopochtli purported sons or brothers present at the Templo Mayor.

Following the *Florentine Codex*'s abundant material on Tezcatlipoca, it has become customary to describe this figure as the supreme god of central Mexico. The *Florentine* described many of the attributes and functions of Tezcatlipoca, as well a large number of ritual chants and epithets devoted to him. Some of these attributes, such as his frequent characterization as "all-seeing," as a "giver of life and death," etc., as well as Sahagún insistence on his formless and immateriality, made him the ideal candidate for a kind of Mesoamerica supreme being, a topic we'll study up close in Chapter 4.[^49] But in Las Casas ---in fact, one of the earliest written sources on Tezcatlipoca--- he's presented as the deified founder and ruler of Texcoco. Las Casas's account of Tezcatlipoca runs counter to a long-held distinction between purported "natural deities", in this case a creator figure, and local patrons, who are taken to be deified humans. In the *Apologética*, Tezcatlipoca is regarded as deified king.[^50]

The second figure identified as either a son or brother of Huitzillopochtli is a figure that Las Casas calls "Camachtl", "Camachtil" and "Camastle", who was venerated in Tlaxcala, where a "muy sumptuoso y notable templo" was dedicated to him. He also notes that Camaxtli was venerated in Huejotzingo. All this information most probably comes from Motolinía, who described in detail the cult rendered to the great idol of Camaxtli in Tlaxcala, and noted that the same figure was worshiped in the provices of Huejotzingo, Tepeaca and Zacatlán.[^51] Based on Motolinía, most later accounts present Camaxtli either as the "legendary" founder of Tlaxcala or as the "equivalent" of the Mexica Huitzillopochtli.[^52] However, it must be noted that, in a similar way as Tezcatlipoca, other sources present him as a kind of creator figure. Thus, for example, the *Florentine Codex* recounts a lenghth a myth that Cecelio Robelo aplty called the "theogony of Camaxtle,"[@robelo1911diccionario, 67-9.] in which the primordial couple bore 4 children, among them Tlatlauhcatescatlipoca (literally: Red Tezcatlipoca), who was "adorado por los de Tlaxcala y Huexotzinco bajo el nombre de Camaxtle."

Finally, Las Casas presents the figure he regards as the "grand dios" of New Spain: Quetzalcoatl.[^53] He describes him as the most celebrated and widely venerated deified ruler of New Spain. Such was the high esteem in which he was held, that he was the "gran señor" by antonomasia. As a ruler and "inventor," he established certain trades, he was a law giver, and most importantly, he forbade human sacrifices and preach a worship based solely on flowers, bread, etc. Las Casas also recounts some legends associated to Quetzalcoatl, his provenance, his return, etc. While Andrés de Tapia and Motolinía had previous written about the cult of Quetzalcoat in Cholula, it was really Las Casas who gave the earliest condensation of the legend.[@gillespie1998deity, 190-1.]

In a chapter written around 1536, when Motolinía was the guardian of the Franciscan Convent of Cholula,[^54] Quetzalcóatl was "one of the main gods of the indians", and his importance was manifested in the "infinite" number of temples, sculptures and paintings devoted to him throughout the land.[^55]

Las Casas, by contrast, furnished the reasons why Quetzalcóatl was held in such high esteem and why they regaled him with such "suaves y devotísimos y voluntarios sacrificios":[^56] Quetzalcóatl taught the people of Cholula the art of silver work; secondly, he rejected blood sacrifices of men and animals ---for Motolinía, he had establish this practice--- and accepted only the offering of bread, roses and other flowers, and perfumes and incenses; third, he was a just ruler, who absolutely forbade war, and the plunder and murder that ensued from it; finally, he was a chaste and honest.[^57] The *Apologética* actually does add significant addition to the Quetzalcoatl narrative, and it could be argued that his image will be influenced by the *Apologetica* comparative framework.

## The Aztec Pantheon as a Royal Lineage

I would like to conclude this section noting that the *Apologéticas*'s presentation of a New Spanish pantheon as the group of founding rulers of some of the most powerful central-Mexican altepeme is at the basis of a long-held ethnohistorical tradition that distinguishes between "patron gods" and "civilizing heroes," on the one hand, and "natural" or "cosmic gods" on the other. As we have seen, it's remarkable that in this, one of the founding moments of such a distinction, the figures in fact overlap, and teteuh that throughout the sixteenth-century became, as it were, disembodied and turn into transcendental numen, appear in the *Apologética* as deified kings and inventors. Las Casas's Pan-New-Spanish pantheon shows to what extent the distinction between both classes of beings was rather arbitrary, and resulted of a lengthy process of interpretation and selection rather than a simple uncovering of an purportedly emic Mesoamerican tradition.

Secondly, I would like to emphasize the originality of this integrated pantheon. It's important to remember that the various figures brought together belong in fact to very different, often antagonistic, central-Mexican altepeme. The extreme locality of Nahua teteuh, their ascription to very specific altepeme ---and even to specific *calpulli*, lineages or guilds--- was noted early on by Bernal Díaz del Castillo, who found it a matter of laughter that a "god" venerated in one town was practically ignored in the next town over.[^58] The Mexican pantheon created by Las Casas takes all these figures and brings them together in a way that no Nahua altepetl would have done nor any Nahua writer would do perhaps until Alva Ixtlillxochitl, who presented a more balanced account of rival altepeme.

# 3. Sahagún's Pantheon

\[In process\]

# Bibliography

[^1]: On this characterization of Oviedo, {see}

[^2]: And while the precise contours, and the selected Roman gods who appeared in this identification would have diverse success ---some will have no continuity--- Oviedo's early comparison establishes a theme of extreme persistence.

[^3]: "\[P\]or manera que para pedir favor para la guerra, tienen un ídolo, e para sus labranzas otro, e así para cada cosa de las que ellos quieren o desean que se hagan." @oviedo1959historia, II, bk. 14 (33), ch 11, 48b.

[^4]: See @gillespie1998deity, 280b. For a recent, if unrelated, criticism of the projection of Postclassic figures ---in this case Quetzalcoatl--- across Mesoamerica and into Classic and even the Formative periods, see @florescano2016dios, {page}.

[^5]: @oviedo1959historia, II, bk. 14 (33), ch 11, 48b; cf. Agustine, *City of God*, bk 7.

[^6]: While Aeolus was a Greek god ---or three, according to Diodoro Siculo--- he played an important role in Virgil's Aeneid.

[^7]: I understood incommensurability in the sense given to this term by 20th-century philosophy of science. See, for example, @sep-incommensurability.

[^8]: See ch 1, § {ref}.

[^9]: Sources, however, suggest war associations to Tláloc, through sacrifice. See Pastorzy "Aztec Tláloc..."

[^10]: Bernal did describe a third "ídolo" in the Templo Mayor, whose named he had forgotten, but his description leaves the question open. See the discussion in @boone1987research, 13-4.

[^11]: INAH, Boletín Nº 196 (June 7, 2017). The identification of Ehécatl and Quetzazlcóatl has recently been called into question by Florescano. See [-@florescano2016dios], {range}.

[^12]: @olivier2010panteon, {page}

[^13]: Among the better known are Centeotl, Chicomecoatl, Centeo Itztlicihuatl{check} and Xilonen

[^14]: FC, VI, ch. 8, {fol}.

[^15]: According to Tezozomoc, Centéotl was among the deities brought to the Templo Mayor by one of the 7 *calpulli* of Tenochtitlan during the celebration of {feast} @tezozomoc1598cronica, f. 1r.

[^16]: Tezozomoc, however, claims that the figure of Tezcatlipoca was among those brought to the Templo by the 7 calpulli, and suggest that the main deities venerated in the Temple were Huitzilopuchtli, Tlacolteotl and Mictlanteuctli. @tezozomoc1598cronica, f. 1r.

[^17]: {ref}

[^18]: "Por manera que, resolviendo mi opinion, los anteçesores de Monteçuma son de la misma costa del Sur de Nicaragua é de aquel golpho de Orotiña." @oviedo1855historia, 534.

[^19]: In fact, among the *testimonia* on what has been called the Durango heresies, it was due to this passage by Oviedo that both events were considered to be linked, a relation that has recently been refuted.

[^20]: The "gran heregía" was described in the *Crónica de Juan II* and the 4th edition of the "Crónica" of Jiménez de Rada.

[^21]: {bazan}

[^22]: {refs}

[^23]: In Villegas's version: "Los sus cobertores estaban suspensos \| y fuera muy duros lamentos salian \| con tales clamores que bien parecian \| de miseros ser alançados y ofensos \| yo dije maestro que pueblos condensos \| aqui sepelidos estan en las arcas \| estan me repuso los heresiarcas \| con otros sequaces que fueron inmensos." @villegas1515infierno,{fol}

[^24]: "Veras otras tristes por ser adevinas \| dejaron el aspa la rueca y el fuso \| fechizos obrando en pestifero uso \| de ymagines cartas y yerbas malinas \| sus tratos dañosos de falsas xorguinas." @villegas1515infierno, {fol}

[^25]: villegas1515infierno, {pag}

[^26]: It's important to note that, in so far as the similarities exist, they are already the process of a selection: what survived of Mendoza's account was precisely that which resembled Livy's account of Rome. His view was furthermore that of soldier, familiar with the intricacies and the cunning of power. It is, after all, not a humanist.

[^27]: "Puestos a otorgar la primacía literaria a uno de los tres \[escritores\] no dudara yo en suponer que Páez habría realizado la labor de compulsa y acumulación de datos, que fray Bartolomé los aprovecharía en su misma estructura y que fray Jerónimo los distribuiría sin intentos comparativos en sus *Repúblicas*." @saenz1976manuscritos, 186-7

[^28]: Páez de Castro, *Memorial de las cosas necesarias para escribir historia*, BNE ms. Q-18, 319. Repr. in @courcelles2009escribir, ch. 8, Anexo 2, 316-28.

[^29]: {ref}

[^30]: Chapter 74.

[^31]: *Ethicorum*, ch 11; *Summa*, Sec. sec., quae. 85, art. 1; *De legibus*, f. 34.

[^32]: @lascasas1967apologetica, ch 121, 639.

[^33]: @lascasas1967apologetica, ch 121, 639.

[^34]: The *Genealogia* is referenced throughout the *Apologética*, but its material ---a good part of it unique to Boccaccio's compendium--- is more frequently used without attribution. Cf. the use of Theodoncius in ch. 49, who Las Casas calls an "auctor griego y copioso" --- an unidentified source of *Genealogia* that scholars now consider a pseudonym of Paulo de Perugia, Boccaccio's mentor in Naples. For Las Casas's use of Polydore, see the digression on the pyramids in the ancient world that follows the description of the Templo Mayor, that Las Casas is among the first to describe as a "pirámide." A study of Las Casas use of the great mythographic compendia available in the sixteenth century ---Boccaccio, Polydore, Giraldi, el Tostado, etc.--- remains to be done.

[^35]: King Lysanias is mentioned by Josephus (*Antiquitates*, 14.126)and the Gospel of Luke, (3.1), but neither of these sources identify him as Jupiter.

[^36]: "Tuvieron en toda esta tierra otro dios en grande reverencia, y era el dios del agua, que llamaron *Tláluc*, a quien ofrecían muy costoso sacrificio, como se dirá." AHS, ch. 122, 647.

[^37]: Consider, for instance, the absence or erasure of Tlatelolco and its rulers.

[^38]: @lascasas1967apologetica, ch. 122, 643; see also ch. 50, {page}, on the Templo Mayor.

[^39]: Las Casas refered explicitly to the fruit, but the actual coat, granted in 1523, has a bordure of cactus leaves.

[^40]: Judith 3, 5-6. @lascasas1967apologetica, ch. 122, 644.

[^41]: Suetonius {ref}, Josephus, *Antiquitates*, bk. 28, ch 15.

[^42]: Acts, 12. @lascasas1967apologetica, ch. 122, 644.

[^43]: Specially useful is @boone1987research.

[^44]: "Pero, sobre todo, en las partes que llegauan, lo primero hazían hazer el cu o templo de su ydolo, dios de ellos, Huitzilopochtli, y como benían cantidad dellos, heran de siete barrios, cada uno de su barrio traía el nombre de su dios, como era Quetzalcoatl, Xocomo y Matla, Xochiquetzal y Chichitic, Çentutl y Piltzinteuctli, Meteutl y Tezcatlypuca, Mictlanteuctli y Tlamacazqui y otros dioses, que aunque cada barrio de los siete traía señaldo su dios, traían asimismo otros dioses con ellos, y los que más hablan con los yndios eran Huitzilopuchtli y Tlacolteutl y Mictlanteuctli"{ref}.

[^45]: AHS, ch. 122, {page}.

[^46]: "En cada altar de aquellos dos estaba un ídolo de bulto muy grande. Eran ambos como dos grandes gigantes." AHS, ch. 50, {page}

[^47]: Today, this mountain chain is known as the the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt.

[^48]: "Dícense aborígenes las gentes que habitan en algunas tierras que son tan antiguas que no se sabe dellas de dónde trujeron oriigen, y así las gentes antiquísimas que se hallaron y poblaron a Italia y estaban derramadas por ella cuando Eneas vino a ella, se dijeron aborígenes, cuasi sin origen o que no se sabía su origen." AHC, ch. 122, 643.

[^49]: In the eighteenth-century, Lorenzo Boturini Benaduci summarized this tradition as follows: "TEZCATLIPOCA, hieroglyph for Divine Providence, the primary Indian deity, meaning that, as our pagans acknowledged, the world was governed by a divine wisdom that had its seat in heaven and all human things in its care." @boturini2015idea, 7.

[^50]:  According to the *Historia de los mexicanos por sus pinturas*, there were several original gods all called Tezcatlipoca, who were brothers. And one of them was called Huitzillopochtli. With the exception of E. Umberger's several articles, Tezcatlipoca's relation to Huitzillopochli has not been sufficiently investigated.

[^51]: @motolinia2015historia, ch. 10, 63-5 and ch. 11, 65-7.

[^52]: For example @baudot1983historia, 170, and the recent editors of the RAE's *Historia de los indios de la Nueva España* (ch. 10, 64, n. 9 and ch. 11, 65, n. 1). Cf. @robelo1911diccionario, 69, who disputes the identification with Huitzillopochtli on the grounds that, according to Sahagún (see note below), Camaxtli was the "older brother" of Huitzillopochtli.

[^53]: Discussions of Quetzalcoatl are often mirred by a need to weight the account under examination against a kind of Grand Unified Account of Quetzalcoatl. Among the many problems of this procedure, is that is obscures the process of sense-making and interpretation that developed overtime, and thus erasas historical specificity. In this brief discussion, I follow instead an hermeneutical approach, which focuses only on what was known at a given point.

[^54]: {page} Motolinía described the cult of Quetzalacoatl, who he always described as the "dios del viento" in Cholula and, in the *Epístola Proemial*, he recounted the substance of the legend of his return and presents his role in the establishment of blood sacrifices. López Austin claimed that Las Casas had little to add to the Motolinía material, but in fact Las Casas account leaves out the identification with the god of wind, whose worship he had described in the description of the Templo Mayor, and his emphasis on his role as king and benefactor of the republic is much more pronounced and adds important detail. In the *Epístola Proemial*, Motolinía wrote that Quetzalcoatl was as a "honest and temperate man," who was the first person to established penitential exercises such as fasting and blood-letting, and who began to preach "natural law."[^59]

[^55]: "A este Quetzalcóatl tuvieron los indios por uno de los principales de sus dioses, y llamáronle dios del aire y por todas partes le edificaron infinito número de templos, y levantaron su estatua y pintaron su figura." @motolinia2015historia, 12-3.

[^56]: The fact that the sacrifices were "voluntary" furthers the evocation of Herodes Agrippa that, as discussed above, was considered less wicked than other ancient kings by merely tolerating, rather than instituting, the worship offered by his people. See above.

[^57]: A éste canonizaron por su sumo dios y le tuvieron grandísimo amor, reverencia y devoción, y le ofrecieron suaves y devotísimos y voluntarios sacrificios por tres razones: la primera, porque les enseñó el oficio de la platería, el cual nunca hasta entonces se había sabido ni visto en aquella tierra, de lo cual mucho se jactan o jactaban todos los vecinos naturales de aquella ciudad; la segunda, porque nunca quiso ni admitió sacrificios de sangres de hombres ni de animales, sino solamente de pan y de rosas, y flores y perfumes, y de olores; la tercera, porque vedaba y prohibía con mucha eficacia las guerras, robos y muertos y otros daños que los hiciesen unos a otros. @lascasas1967apologetica, ch. 122, 645.

[^58]: {ref}
