---
author: dhc 
layout: post
published: true
categories: news
title: American Egypt
---

I will deliver a keynote entitled "Mexico: An American Egypt" at a panel on Egyptian and Sudanese Collections in Latin America organized by the Comité international pour l’Égyptologie (CIPEG)...   

## MUSEUM MATTERS 2022
## Egyptian and Sudanese Collections in Latin America and the Caribbean
*Saturday, 23 April*
4pm to 5:30pm (Paris time)

The inaugural panel discussion of the Museum Matters series focuses on the formation of Egyptian and
Sudanese collections in Latin American and Caribbean countries. What was the impetus for the creation
of the collections in Mexico City, Havana, La Plata, and Rio de Janeiro? How do these collections fit within
European colonialism, the ‘Age of Enlightenment’ and the building of national identity?
All presentations will be in English.

<br>

Saturday, April 24, 2022
4:10-4:30pm 
Keynote Talk. *Mexico: An American Egypt* (David H. Colmenares)

In 1517, an expedition led by Francisco Hernández de Córdoba landed on the coast of Yucatan. In
the ancient site of Ekab, the Spanish encountered monumental architecture that triggered deep-
seated cultural memory. They named the land “Great Cairo.” Since then, an Egyptian imaginary
never ceased to haunt pre-scientific Mesoamerican archaeology. Whether mediated by
Renaissance Egyptomania, the Napoleonic campaign, or Victorian exhibition culture, Egypt
became Mesoamerica’s archaeological unconscious. This presentation charts the turning points
and articulations that led to the imagined entanglement of these otherwise unrelated civilizations.

http://cipeg.icom.museum/media/docs/musmatters2022_eng.pdf
